# (Prosper Loan Data Exploration)
## by (Eze, Obinna Joshua Miguel)


## Dataset

> The dataset has 113,937 loans with a total of 81 variables, such as loan amount, loan status, borrower annual percentage rate (interest rate), current loan status, borrower income, and many more in the original dataset.

## Summary of Findings

> In the exploration, I discovered the following:

> Within the period of 2005 to 2014, 33061 loans has been completed, 11992 were chargedoff, 5018 defaulted and below 3000 loans are past there due date. 5 loans were cancelled within this period and 55730 loans is currently running. For the most part the bigger the loan amount, the lesser the number of borrowers. Loans for the term of 36months(3years) has the highest count, followed by 60months(5years) and the least count is for 12months(1year). Much more persons (87224 borrower) took or prefer a loan of 3year term, while a lesser number of persons(24228 borrower) took for 5year term and a far lesser number(1614 borrowers) took for 1year term. The highest number of those who request for and have accessed loans are employed, and the least number of those are the unemployed and retired. The highest number of listed borrowers are those who registered their occupation as other, followed by the professionals and the least are those registered as judge and student. The number of borrowers who has a mortgage on their credit profile or provided documentation confirming they are home owners are slightly 1.5% greater than those who did not. The number of borrowers with a prosper rating of C has the highest loan listing while the least loan listing is with a prosper rating of N/A. The distribution for the stated monthly income is unimodal and skewed to the right. The highest income frequency falls between 3k and 5k. The distribution for the monthly loan payment is unimodal and skewed to the right. As the amount to pay increases monthly, the frequency or count of listed loans reduces. More numbers of borrowers who have no mortgage completed there loans and far more number of borrowers who are not in a group completed there loans. Also, a far larger percentage of borrowers with a loan term of 36 months completed there loans. Similarly a far larger percentage of borrowers who are not in a group have current loan status while borrowers with a 12 month term has far more current loan status than other terms. The prosper rating of D=4 has the highest number of completed loan status while a rating of C=5 has the highest number of completed loan status. There is a positive and significant correlation between monthly loan payment and the loan original amount but again that should be expected.There is only a weak positive correlation between the stated monthly income and the loan original amount as indicated in the heatmap above. There is also a below average negative correlation between the borrower's APR against the loan original amount. This will imply the higher the loan original amount, the lower the annual interest rate and vice versa. The highest number of borrowers are those not in group with 88.12% of all the loans listed. There is also a close matching between the prosper rating and the loan original amount. The rating was created from AA - HR, AA being a rating of 7 has the highest average and actual loan original amount and HR being the lowest rating of 1 has the lowest average and actual loan original amount. Also seen is that occupations with the highest average and actual loan original amount are amongst professionals, starting with Judges, Pharmacist, Doctors and so on. This is interesting because the Judge occupation as seen in the univariate analysis had the second to lowest count of listed borrowers, only above the student occupation. Yet the borrowed the highest loan and has the highest average of all loans they took. Those with the lowest average original loan amount are students. The prosper loan charges more annual percentage rate or interest rate on the unemployed. As seen in the plot of borrower's APR against occupation, the Judge occupation has the least borrower apr. It appears the higher the loan amount the smaller the borrower apr. As the term increases from 12-36-60, so too does the amount given as loan to the borrowers. Interesting the prosper rating alpha stays true only for the term of 60 with the highest loan amount being for AA and the lowest for E. As seen the prosper rating is valid as it corresponds to borrowers who receive equivalent loan amounts and as seen frequency or count of the completed and current loan status diminishes as the prosper rating frops from AA to HR and as the Loan original amount drops too. The loan status whether completed or current has a higher average loan original amount as the term increases. The employed completed more of their loans and with a larger average loan original amount. They also have more current loans at a larger average loan original amount. The part-time has the least completed loans at the lowest average loan original amount. 

> Apart form the major interest variables, I discovered that the Borrower annual percentage is usually around the 0.1 to 0.2 range for larger loans above 25000 dollars and a larger proportion of those borrowers are homeowners. The 12 month term has the highest interest rate in average while the 36 month loan term has the lowest interest rate.



## Key Insights for Presentation

> For the presentation, I will show the effect of the loan classifiers such as selected qualititative variables (employment status, occupation, prosper alpha rating) and numeric variables (borrower apr, term, monthly loan payment, stated monthly income) on either or both the loan amount and the loan status. I will begin with the loan amount and then the loan status.

> Subsequently, I will show the relationship the loan original amount and the following: monthly loan payment, state monthly income and borrowers APR. Then I will show how the employment status, prosper rating alpha, term and the occupation affects the loan original amount. Also, I will show how the prosper rating, loan original amount, term, employment status affects the loan status. In summary, I will show how one or more of these variables influences the loan amount and the loan status.